# SQLAlchemy Columns

In some cases you may need more control over the columns generated by SQLModel, this can be done by using the `sa_column`, `sa_column_args`, and `sa_column_kwargs` arguments when creating the `Field` object.

There are many use cases for this, but ones where this is particularity useful is when you want more advanced defaults for values than what is easy to implement with Pydantic, such `created_at` or `update_at` timestamps for rows.

## Columns for Timestamps

Two ways of implementing `created_at` timestamps with Pydantic are [default factories](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/usage/models/#field-with-dynamic-default-value) and [validators](https://pydantic-docs.helpmanual.io/usage/validators/#validate-always), however there's no straightforward way to have an `update_at` timestamp.

The SQLAlchemy docs describe how `created_at` timestamps can be automatically set with either [default](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/14/core/defaults.html#python-executed-functions) or [server-default](https://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/14/core/defaults.html#server-invoked-ddl-explicit-default-expressions) functions, by using `sa_column=Column(...)` as described in the SQLAlchemy documentation we can achieve the same behaviour:

```{.python .annotate hl_lines="8 12"}
{!./docs_src/advanced/sa_column/tutorial001.py[ln:9-21]!}
```

Above we are saying that the `registered_at` column should have a `server_default` value of `func.now()` (see full code for imports), which means that if there is no provided value then the current time will be the recorded value for that row.

As there is a value there now, then it will not be changed automatically in the future.

The `updated_at` column has an `onupdate` value of `func.now()`, this means that each time an `UPDATE` is performed, the function will be executed, meaning that the timestamp changes whenever a change is made to the row.

!!! warning
    The difference between client-side python functions, server-side ddl expressions, and server-side implicit defaults is important in some situations but too in-depth to go into here. Check the SQL and SQLAlchemy docs for more information.

<details>
<summary>👀 Full file preview</summary>

```Python
{!./docs_src/advanced/sa_column/tutorial001.py!}
```

</details>

### Pydantic Implementation

Implementing these timestamps on the DB side with SQLAlchemy works very well as the database itself is what will create and update the fields whenever a relevant database interaction occurs.

It's possible to achieve similar behaviour with Pydantic, for the `created_at` timestamp by using a Pydantic `Field` with a `default_factory`:

```python
from datetime import datetime

from pydantic import BaseModel, Field


class Model(BaseModel):
    created_at: datetime = Field(default_factory=datetime.utcnow)


m1 = Model()
m2 = Model()
print(f'{m1.created_at} != {m2.created_at}')
#> 2022-05-19 10:49:22.053624 != 2022-05-19 10:49:22.053641
```

Another approach is to use a Pydantic `validator`:

```python
from datetime import datetime

from pydantic import BaseModel, validator

class Model(BaseModel):
    created_at: datetime = None

    @validator('ts', pre=True, always=True)
    def set_created_at_now(cls, v):
        return v or datetime.now()
```

Both of these approaches come with the major caveat that default fields are set during the **Pydantic model instantiation**, as opposed to during **interactions with the database**, instead of the SQLModel approach which sets it with `server_default` which means that the timestamp will be exactly when the row is created in the database.

The real issue starts when looking at the `updated_at` timestamp - SQLAlchemy has the `onupdate` default which runs a function when the row is updated in the database, but there is no easy way to do this in Pydantic as it has no concept of 'about to be saved'.

So the pure Pydantic approach would require some additional logic to always change the `updated_at` timestamp before doing a write to the database, which adds some more complexity to the code and does not have benefits over the SQLAlchemy approach.
